Hey there, welcome to the Paws at Data Science Hangout. I'm Libby Herron, and this is a recording
of our weekly community call that happens every Thursday at 12 p.m. U.S. Eastern Time.
If you are not joining us live, you miss out on the amazing chat that's going on. So find
the link in the description where you can add our call to your calendar and come hang
out with the most supportive, friendly, and funny data community you'll ever experience.
Can't wait to see you there. I am super excited today to announce our guest, Nick Wan. Nick
is the Senior Director of Baseball Analytics at the Cincinnati Reds, but he's also a data
science streamer on Twitch, and he's been streaming on Twitch for many, many years.
Nick, would you like to introduce yourself? Tell us a little bit about what you do and
also what you like to do outside of work for fun that's not streaming.
Yeah, thanks for having me at the Data Science Hangout. I'm Nick. I am at the Cincinnati
Reds. I've been there since 2017. I came in as a data scientist, and I have helped
build and build out the department there. I oversee, depending on how you count it,
anywhere from 11 to 15 analysts, data scientists, data people. And we work to support the team
on the field, so it's not business related. We're not working with ticketing. It's nothing
like that. It's how to produce runs. It's how to prevent runs. How to develop players.
All using data and quantitative analysis and strategies to do that. So that's my day and
a lot of my nights. And when I'm not doing that, I'm streaming. So I'm over on Twitch
streaming under NickWayne underscore DataSci. I've been doing that since 2016. End of 2015,
actually, but 2016.
Wow, a long time.
Really long time. Really long time. And we stream all sorts of data science stuff. Anything
from small projects to big projects. We do game show stuff. We do all sorts of different
events. We've done conference coverages. We've done a lot of different things. So right
now we were working on NFL draft related stuff and the NFL drafts tonight, so that's been
kind of fun. And there's several people I see in chat from stream, so hello, chatters.
For fun? I don't know. I don't have a lot of free time. I guess when I'm not doing streaming
or data science stuff, I'm doing probably like in the gym lifting.
That counts. That counts. All right. Well, I was hoping that you could give us a little
bit of context. You've already given us a little bit more, but I don't know anything
about baseball. And I really don't know anything about baseball analytics or sports analytics.
And we are all coming from a bunch of different industries here. So could you help us understand
what type of data you use? Where the data comes from? What exactly you do with it? What
decisions get made based off that data? Stuff like that.
Yeah.
Explain this to me like in five, Nick.
So we'll start out with tabular data and pose data. No, it's so the data, it really is like
a lot of the data that people see when you go to like ESPN or if you're using any of
the different sports data aggregate websites like pro football reference or sports reference
or fan graphs. So you get like that box score data where at the end of the game, if you're
like, I don't know who reads newspapers, but at the sports section, you have like the score
and how many things happened and something that contextualizes the game and gives a reader
an ability to kind of catch up on the game without actually having to watch it. So you
can take all that data. They've collecting box score data since the 18, the late 1890s.
So so you have all this data. And then ultimately, depending on how detailed that box score data
is, you can actually start building out predictions of whether it's run scored the next game or
whether it's how many hits are going to be scored the next year or achieve the next game.
All sorts of different things, just given like very simple things like counting stats
that people track just by watching the game. So the data since the 1890s has evolved as
we can all imagine with the advent of technology. So you have stuff like the physics of the pitch.
So how fast the ball goes, but also like the spin rate on a ball. So if you have a baseball,
depending on how much force you apply to it, you could actually spin it and the RPMs actually give
different value to the quality of the pitch. You can have differences in the environment.
So if you're in higher altitude, like in Colorado versus lower altitude, like in San Francisco,
you can have differences given the projectile of the ball. And you use all this information
to ultimately either predict events or evaluate players. So you could evaluate players by the
events that happened in the game using data. So is a pitcher, for instance, throwing really hard?
Is there a particular inning where their velocity of the pitch starts tailing off?
Are there particular strategies you can employ depending on the quality of your pitchers?
For your batters, are they swinging a bat in a certain way? Are certain batters matching up
against a certain team optimally? If not, is there something to do with the lineup that you could
optimize the amount of at-bats a particular player might get throughout a series depending
on the team matchup? So the data itself, whether it's starting relatively small,
or you have all these physics-type layers that we could capture through,
whether it's computer vision or some sort of radar tracking, you could actually build pretty
complex models to describe the events that are happening in the game. And ultimately,
not just quantify them, but have pretty good predictions on what's happening,
whether it's in-game at the pitch level or whether it's at the season level.
Awesome. Okay. I feel like I have a much better idea now. I feel like you mentioned injury stuff.
Do you do any, I don't know, motion capture or analyzing the actual training and stuff to help
prevent injuries? I'm asking because I know that other sports departments and teams that I've talked
to that a lot of their data analysis pushes actually on that side, preventing injuries.
Yeah. So we do have skeletal data back in the day. And still to this day, you'll see people
wearing styrofoam balls and a motion capture suit against a green screen or something.
And so given the advancements in computer vision, if you set up high frame rate cameras,
enough of them, you kind of get that motion capture marker list now. So you don't need
the foam balls or anything. So at all major league parks, there's 12 cameras that are set up that
capture the events on the field. And several of them are focused on whether it's the pitcher or
whether it's the batter or different players on the field. And that's capturing 29 points,
things like your head and your neck and places on your wrist and elbow and down your spine and
stuff. And we could actually end up quantifying the biomechanical space, as they call it. So
the skeletal data that comes in, you can now quantify not just like how fast you throw it,
but like how much torque or how much force you're putting on your elbow or your shoulder. And
tracking that can actually help prevent injury or at least curb injury.
Awesome. Okay, cool. You know, there was an anonymous question in Slido, actually,
that sort of asked this. It's like, what kind of mechanisms just all the hundreds of cameras in
the game allow for these detailed measurements and stats of in-game metrics? I think that that
question also kind of applies to other stuff. Like how do you catch all of these things? Whose job is
it to watch all of these things and like record everything? But you know, people have been
recording baseball stats forever. Yeah, it's luckily not hundreds of cameras. It's like
maybe a dozen cameras. So you have the 12 cameras that do the motion capture and then you have like
maybe another like eight cameras, several of them are like broadcast cameras. And then you have some
that we set up for coach use. So we're trying to evaluate plays and stuff. And most of it's just
computer vision. So like you said, there's been watching baseball for a long time. A lot of people
are, I mean, the league spends money on people who are official scorers. So they're tagging events
that happen. And all of that actually can be treated as label data. So if you're doing any
like classification modeling, you can take certain events and say, yeah, that this is this label.
And then as a play develops, computer vision models can actually start tagging those events
given what kind of motions are happening, where the ball is in space,
all of that kind of stuff. And then there is some manual. Yeah, so there is some manual process,
manual review. And shout out to everyone at the advanced media team at the league who spent a lot
of time trying to quality assure quality check. I'm sure if I didn't give a shout out to Tani and
the group, I'd hear about it at one of our meetings. So shout out to those at the league office helping
us with the data side of things. Awesome. Yeah, I mean, I'm a data scientist, and I had not really
thought about the fact that computer vision would be useful in this in this scenario. But of course,
it would be right. Well, we have a billion questions in Slido. So I would love to hop in
and ask some of them, especially because some of them will help us build a little bit of context,
I think around who you are and what you do. There was one, actually, you know, there were a couple
about streaming that I think it would be nice to cover, because a lot of people don't really know
what streaming is. So Nick streams on Twitch, and he also has a Discord server. I'm going to
actually put a poll in the Slido, which I just started, and hopefully you can see it that you
can go answer asking you if you've ever tuned into a Twitch stream or used Discord, so that
everybody can see the results of that. So the questions were around, like, can you tell us a
little bit more about streaming? But also, was it scary for you when you first started? Like, how was
it received in the beginning? What's your community like? How has that evolved over the years? Stuff
like that. Yeah, the streaming, so I was in, I did my grad school at Utah State. And at the end of it,
when I was working on my dissertation, I was kind of inspired by someone who, one of my friends,
when they were trying to finish their PhD, they had, like, this tracker of how many words they
typed on their dissertation. A lot of people in this chat probably know, it's Chris Albin.
So he did this whole thing of, like, how many words he put into his dissertation, and
people kind of kept accountability over him to finish through his progress
in tracking in that sheet. So I decided to, you know, I'm in my dissertation at this point,
trying to finish it. And so rather than doing it this, you know, Google Sheet tracking way,
I decided to just stream it. So for, you know, several months, I would just go live,
writing my dissertation. It was literally me just screen sharing a Word doc in my lab.
And people would come in, not a lot, as you can imagine, people were, like,
super interested in, like, very esoteric neuroscience work. But it was good, because
the people who were interested, they, some of those folks ended up sticking around for longer.
So talked about my dissertation, kept me honest about putting words on paper and rewriting things,
explaining things. And then when I finished that, finished writing, I still liked streaming,
because the people who were coming into chat were fun, and it was kind of like, you know,
nice social outlet in the middle of the day for me. So continued to stream, mostly just streamed,
like, random stuff. I used to stream, like, generative art. And like, back before, like,
there was this whole, like, large language model thing, like, we would make, like,
bots that talk like other people and, like, deployed bots on Twitter and stuff.
Shout out to Crystal Lance, who helped me in all those early streams. So we would,
we would code all this random stuff, and then started doing NFL work,
because NFL started releasing these, like, gigantic play-by-play datasets. And
I ended up messing around with it. And then a bunch of people ended up coming in for that.
And then they realized, like, oh, this guy actually is also a sports analytics person
who isn't, you know, shy about sharing, like, what materials are being used, and
what methods are being used, and all of this stuff. So that was, like, 2016, 2017. And then
ever since then, been streaming random data science projects and sports analytics projects.
I saw someone in chat ask about cricket data science. And while we haven't had much cricket
available, we've done a lot of different sports. We've done bull riding. We've done F1.
Oh, wow.
We've done a lot of eSports data. We've done, we did an entire thing on The Bachelorette.
And you also stream game shows.
Yeah. So we have data science game shows. So I think back in 21,
back in 21, our most popular stuff was called Sliced. And that's on YouTube now in VOD form.
But we would stream once a week. It would be four data scientists. And they would have two hours to
basically complete a Kaggle competition that we made. They had no idea what the data was.
They would get the data, like, five minutes before the clock started at 9pm. And they had
from 9pm to 11pm to put together a... Yeah, that's right. Greg's in chat. He was in Sliced.
But we had 16 data scientists. A lot of people in here probably know a handful of them. We had
Julia Silgi was on there. And we had D-Rob was on there. Jesse Mostapak was on there.
So a bunch of people. Greg was on there, of course. And 16 data scientists. And they
competed against each other twice. And then we had a finals. And it was pretty big. It was like,
maybe the turnout for this Hangout, but like, rather than talking about data science, everyone
was like picking sides and like, cheering on people. It was pretty cool. So that's the game
show I needed my life. When I found Sliced, I was like, Oh, wait, this is so fun. And like I had,
I never watched it live. I just watched it on YouTube. But I also discovered VizBuzz, which is
even more nerve wracking, I think for me, which is like, Nick spins a wheel. And the wheel randomly
picks a data visualization. And they're like, great data visualizations by talented people.
And then participants have to recreate this live. And you get like 25 or 30 minutes to do this,
right? So I do Tidy Tuesday slash Piety Tuesday every week with friends. And I spend about 30
minutes creating a visualization. It's hard. It's really difficult. It's so fun to watch.
So how did VizBuzz get started? Actually, you know what, we got to jump to questions from the chat.
Because we could talk about VizBuzz and stuff forever. There's another season of VizBuzz coming
up in June. So everybody, if you are interested in doing a VizBuzz competition, please get in
contact with Nick or I. Okay, true. So I asked about medical data applied to models, mild versus
moderate injuries, or fitness reports. That is our top question. I'm going to count that as answered,
because I feel like we have talked enough about about how the motion capture works and how that
is relevant to what Nick does. But Maxim's asked a question, which I really like, which is how do
you convince coaches and players that specific prediction is accurate and reliable? So this is a
question about like, communication and trust. Um, yeah, we actually were talking about this over the
last like week on my stream. There's a lot of the time where you finish a project, and you hand it
off or you have a product or a report or a dashboard and you hand it off and there isn't much
communication as to like, what went into it. It's just kind of, here's the analysis, right?
So we went through like the past week of like, say you create this like, quality of pitch model,
this value of like, how valuable a particular pitch would be. How would you communicate that
to a coach? And so for like, a couple streams, we had people say like, all right, who's your
favorite pitcher, we put it in. And then here's what the pitchers, you know, arsenal of pitches
are, you know, they throw a fastball, a curveball, a slider, a change up. And here's what they plot
on this value map. What would you recommend them do for each pitch in order for that to,
in order for their pitch, say a fastball to be more valuable, given the model recommendations.
And so we went through the process of like, oh, well, the model says move it, you know, four inches
higher. So they just had to throw it four inches higher. It's like, well, it's not that easy, right?
Like, the coach is now going to come to you and say, well, the only ways to do that is if you
get them to change their mechanics of throwing or maybe change an arm slot. Maybe they have to
do something differently that they haven't done, or haven't needed to do for like 20 years, because
they're a professional baseball player in the major leagues now. So it's really difficult
sometimes to communicate, like, what is objectively the best thing for a player versus
like what a player might actually be able to accomplish. So how to build that trust is like,
on one side, yes, like always try to stay true to like the most accurate interpretations of your
data and what you should do to accomplish the best outcomes. But you also should at least
try to start seeing it from the perspective of the stakeholder or the perspective of the end user,
right? The person you're applying the data to. So if a pitcher, if you tell a pitcher like, hey,
your slider could use a, you know, four more inches of horizontal break, needs to sleep a
little more for it to be even more valuable. They're just going to ask you, how do you do that?
And if you don't know, if you don't, if you're just like, I don't know how to do that, just do it, I
guess. You lose a lot of credibility in the communication side. And it's like, you don't
want to lose that because you've spent so much time putting in so much effort into your model
and your analysis, right? So that sort of communication layer is its own project. And I
try to emphasize that, like, yes, step into the shoes of the person you're talking to a lot of the
time. Like, what does it mean to move a pitch a few inches? Like, is it a grip change? Like,
are they going from like a grip like this to like up the seams a little more? Is it an arm slot
change where like, that's a bigger mechanical change, and it doesn't just affect a slider or a
fastball, but every single pitch that they have? Is it something where like, they're going to have
to be like pronating or supinating their arm or their wrist more in order for spin to be
a particular way for the ball to move a particular way? Is that going to cause some
some warning or issue for injury? So you have like, so many more layers than just
move the pitch a few inches, that doesn't necessarily come out in the analysis. And
and the best way to build buy-in is like, to level, right? To level with the coach to level
with the player of like, I understand that this is a difficult thing. And if we do want to get
better at this one thing, this is the recommendation. And at times, I think another thing,
just thinking about last night's stream, because we were doing this,
someone asked, someone was like, yeah, we should move it more, you know, horizontally. But really,
the the better answer was like, actually, you should probably move it like more vertically,
not because it's in the better direction, it's actually still in like a bad area. But it's
better than where it was, it's relatively much better. Even though it's not in a good,
valuable area, it's less bad, right? And sometimes less bad is the best we can do.
And like, I know, in the world of quantitative analysis, like we always want to be best and like,
settling for less than like optimal is like frustrating at times. But sometimes that is
the answer. Like, it's better to just be better. And sometimes it's better to just do better.
Yeah, you know what, there's, there's a question in Slido from Marcos that's kind of along this
line. We're like, not everybody, not every team is making the playoffs every year and winning.
Not every team is making the World Series. And like, I would love it if he could ask that live.
So let me see if I can find Marcos here to unmute him. Marcos, would you like to ask your
question live? Hello? Sure. Yeah, I mean, you know, I'm a big, big baseball fan. And I think
fans and I think the general public, you know, a team is judged by, you know, wins and losses. Did
they make the playoffs? You know, the Oscars were considered very analytical, they won two World
Series, everyone says, well, the analytics must have worked. You know, everyone, the people who
were successful got moved on to other teams. So how about, you know, obviously, a team success is
not just dependent on the analytics team. There's the coaching staff, there's the owner's budget,
there's, there's just a general manager listening to you all and like actually signing the players
you want to sign or whatever, or drafting who you want to draft. So how do you, but so how do you,
or how does the organization evaluate the analytics team's performance and success?
If it's like, if we can't just use, well, the team's record is better now than it was five
years ago, or whatever. Yeah, department KPIs, it's, you know, unlike other industries, or you
could be evaluated on like, does your ROI improve given your marketing budget or something?
It's hard to quantify or evaluate, like, is an analytics team improving the organization as a
whole? And I think the best ways to evaluate whether or not that's true is a couple things.
Like, the first thing is, analytics not only provides like quantitative analysis, but it also
provides like, guardrails, right? A lot of the time, analytics isn't about like, what's the right
answer, but it's about the less wrong answers. So if you're able to eliminate being in the gutter,
and you're just on the fairway the entire time, like, that's a lot better, right? So
one evaluation metric is, are you able to showcase that throughout all of these departments,
there are like statistical or analytically driven boundaries of like, this is like a red flag zone,
or this is a no go area. And if so, like, what are the reasonings? What are like, what is the
quantity of analysis behind that? What is the objective reason why we shouldn't do certain
things? And usually those things, like nine times out of 10, coaches believe too, they're like, oh,
yeah, like, those are bad things. We shouldn't do that. Or like a staff member might say like,
yeah, like, those are things we should avoid. Sometimes we do them. But now I know we should
never do them. So setting up more boundaries, I think is one way to evaluate like, the especially
the width, the reach of analytics is like, how much involvement is there in like the discussion
of what is the go zone versus the no go zone. And I think that's like a pretty easy thing,
not just to achieve in baseball or in sports, but like really any company, right? Like,
while I've been at the Reds for a long time, I also worked at a
Kentucky Fried Chicken as their manager of data science for two years. And it was similar there
to like the object is to increase profit margins and do it in a time where people weren't really
going out to eat. So how do you improve that? One of the one of the, you know, behind the scenes
things that happened at KFC was stop buying things that aren't profitable, which are like,
sounds easy. But data really helped sell that story of like, yeah, let's replace wedges with
fries. Let's make sure that pot pies are a seasonal item, because no one's buying pot pies
in July. Let's pivot towards more chicken sandwiches, because they sell faster, they're
easier to stock. And that ended up being fairly impactful for that brand for that period of time.
So being able to just set up boundaries is like one way to show like, yeah, analytics is doing
research, they're able to implement like rules of the road for a lot of different departments and
decision making tools. And then from there, once that gets adopted, I feel like then you can kind
of start working towards that, like, idea of analytics should be predicting the right thing,
as opposed to, as opposed to suggesting what you shouldn't do. So those are just generally
some thoughts on how to measure and analytics reach. Awesome, thank you. I kind of hadn't
really thought about ticket sales as a metric, like, baseball teams have to make money.
I don't know, I'm just, I'm thinking more as you were talking about baseball as a business.
And I'm realizing a lot of these questions and answers, there are parallels to business, right?
Like we have to make these same appeals about, yes, that would be great to change, but
it's not, it doesn't make sense for us to be able to change it, or it would be really hard to change,
or this would be really difficult to measure, or, oh, that's not actually possible. So yeah,
so many parallels with business. Thank you, Marcos, for the fantastic question. We have a
bunch of questions in here. We're at the halfway mark. So I would love to ask
a context building question again, which is what data tools do you use? Because usually this comes
up a lot sooner, and we haven't gotten there yet. So what languages do you and your team work in?
What tools do you use? What IDEs do you use? Things like Snowflake, like Databricks, do they
talk to your other data tools? Give me the rundown, if you can, as much as you can. Oh yeah, real quick,
people are asking about the Vesta board. It is a Vesta board. And then people in chat, there
is interaction with the Vesta, you could go into the Twitch chat and, like, make it say things if
you want. Oh, that's so fun. Yeah, I'm sure someone in chat will probably go into offline
chat and just do it in a second, but it's fine. So the tools we use, our team is split, half of us
are doing all of our work in R. Actually, the majority of our repo is probably R. And then
the other half are in Python. And then we're always in the database, and we're accessing
database through whether it's SQL or whether it's Spark, depending on the environment we're in.
The environment that we're mostly using is our Posit's Pro Enterprise thing. So everyone
just kind of loads up the workbench there and they go to town. And then if we're not in there,
if we got to go on more of the data engineering side of things, our data engineering team works
mostly out of Databricks. So we jump in there and help them out when we can.
And then... Awesome. I know we have some Databricks plus R users, maybe in the chat,
or maybe they're not here. But yeah, lots of Databricks plus R people.
And then when you are saying your database, is that accessing data from Databricks? Do you use
catalog? Yeah. We try to centralize everything in a data warehouse through Databricks. So
that's a lot of it. There are other places we store data just because of
availability of resources. So we have a Snowflake database that also helps us prioritize certain
data feeds for other departments. For example, when you're playing a game and you have a game
every day, data needs to be available, but not just the data, but the resources to run
all the reports and generate all the things that the coaches and the players need for the day.
So if you're competing for resources all in the same cluster, it's hard to really guarantee
execution times. So we've moved some of that to its own resourced environment through Snowflake.
So we have some of that. And then Databricks is where a lot of our dev work happens. So
our Projections team, our Innovations team, our Insights team, they're all
building out not things on the daily basis, but reworking the backend,
update to a certain new model or a certain new versioning of something.
And that's all happening probably through Databricks and through Databricks on the
backend for the data, and then whether it's in Posit or whether it's going through a Databricks
IDE. Cool. So you are a true polyglot data manager. Yeah, not by choice, by necessity.
Do you do most of your own work in one or the other, or do you switch back and forth?
Um, I try not to touch the code base these days. I feel like it's like bad luck for me to go in
there. And like, you know, maybe I look like a PR every now and then, but I don't think I have
there, you know, I don't know how many people relate to this, but as I've grown with this
department, and now that I lead it, like, just people are so smart. And I've hired absolutely
like some of the most talented people, and they could code circles around me now. So
it's more of a detriment if I'm touching the code base than if I, than if I don't let, you know, if
I, the people I hire, they're going to be able to do things faster and better than I. So I don't
touch it too long. Yeah, because I'm seeing lots of smiles and nods and some reactions. So yes,
I think some people can relate. But that's wonderful that you hire people that you know
are good at their jobs, and then you trust them to do that. That sounds like an amazing,
an amazing manager, Nick. Okay, well, we have lots and lots of questions about baseball. Y'all,
I don't even know what some of these questions mean, because I'm a baseball person. But let's,
let's see who we can bring in here. Brian asked two questions. Brian, I'm going to pick one,
because you got two in here. And I am really interested in the second one, which is,
has the legalization of sports betting affected teams data practices at all?
No, not really. I think like, if anything, it's a, it's probably grown the availability of data
in the public space. While I, you know, my day job is working with a ton of data for a baseball team.
On stream, I try to promote as much public work, whether it's in baseball or other sports,
as possible. And maybe the number one thing that I'm noticing with like an influx of like,
gambling companies and sports books, and that kind of stuff, entering the mainstream sports
space now. It's probably like the availability of data that's, that's grown in the public space more
than that it's affected the private sector, the on the team side sector. So you have like access
to way more data and way more things than you've ever had before. That's not just like a, you know,
sign of the times in terms of what people want. Like, I don't know how many people are out there
casually looking up the spin rate of fastballs. But like, if you build models, and you're trying
to like, bet against certain things, maybe some of these things are going to be helpful for you
and your predictions on, you know, whether it's like daily fantasy, or whether it's like some
sort of like money line stuff. And that's not just baseball, but that's football, too. That's,
that's really all sports. So I think like, there's more of an impact there, like for me,
and for, you know, people who work on teams, we're always going to have more data,
then, like, not just the gambling companies, but the public, right. So while, you know, we've been
talking about all this stuff, and like pose data and biomechanics data, there's really not much of
that, really, there is none of it available through the league right now, other than what's provided
to the team. So really only certain like, unless you work for a team, you don't really have access
to like, every single data point that you can. And like, that's even like, just thinking about
it from the major league point of view, you have, you know, seven layers of minor league development,
where you know, players are trying to become major leaguers, and you have, you know, several layers
of amateur, and then different levels of international baseball, and that all has data
as well. So none of that really is available to the public. So internally, we've always had more
data than like, you know, sports books, we've always had more data than the public. And seeing
more data in the public now more than ever, I think that's actually, that's actually more of
a sign of like, what the influence of gambling is doing to baseball from the data side.
Interesting. There's a question in the Slido that's kind of along these lines from Tony.
Tony, would you like to unmute and ask that? And I will highlight it in Slido,
as it goes to the very top and stick it in the chat.
Sure. Thanks, Libby. Hi, Nick. I'm from Boston, big baseball fan. So lately, I've been hearing
a lot about exit velocity for hitters. And I'm wondering how much you use that versus other
other hitter based statistics to evaluate. And I'd also be interested to know if you were
part of the evaluation for Elie de la Cruz, who's probably one of the biggest stars.
And certainly from a big star from Cincinnati standpoint.
Yeah. Thanks for the question, Tony. The first part in terms of exit velocity,
there's both exit velocity and there's the new stuff right now with bat speed. So
shout out to Alan Nathan, physicist who's a professor emeritus at University of Illinois,
right? Chat, you could correct me if I'm wrong. But he's done a ton of work for the last two
decades on exit velocity and the impact of hitting on the baseball and projectile motion
of baseballs. And a lot of his work is about not just exit velocity, but how fast you swing and
the transfer of energy from the bat to the ball and stuff like coefficient of restitution and
drag factors on the ball, backspin versus no backspin produced on the ball, all sorts of
different things on the ball that you can think of in terms of projectile motion. And it is a
gigantic factor. And it is an important factor when it comes to evaluating batters. It's how hard do
you hit it? And then can you produce a speed of your bat that allows you to hit the ball
effectively harder? So there's a lot of that. And we actually just did a Kaggle competition
over the last two months. I put one together for my community using Batspeed data as one of the
features. So MLB releases, like I said, they release a ton of new data now. And over the
last year, they released a ton of new Batspeed data. And in the coming weeks now, maybe this
is a leak. I don't know. But it's okay. Tell Mike and Tom to yell at me. It's fine.
But there is going to be more new data that's coming out through Baseball Savant, which is the
main data resource for the public when it comes to baseball. So be on the lookout for new data
feeds. They showed off some of this at the Saber Analytics Conference in February, March. And
some of it's going to be related to attack angles. So like the angle of your bat as you swing through
the zone, more Batspeed metrics, more biomechanics metrics for batters. So there's going to be this
entire batter analytics revolution coming soon. And I'm pretty excited to see what the public is
going to come up with when it comes to all this new batter stuff that's going to come out this
year. So it's exciting. Yeah, that's so cool. Joey was just saying, did you say hang out breaking
news? I love it. Oh, yeah. Sorry. One more thing about Ellie. Yeah, I was there at 2018. They
evaluated Ellie. That was our international group. That was one of the first years I was working with
the international group. I wasn't there to evaluate Ellie, nor was I a part of any Ellie
evaluation. I take zero credit for Ellie, all credit to our international group at the time.
Richard Fernandez, who's over at the Dodgers now, a big shout to him. He actually was a big help to
some of the stuff I do now. It's not just the analytics department I lead, but I also am the
head of our psychology and cognition department. So he helped a good amount helping establish that
with me. Awesome. Okay. I think that we partially covered some questions from the Slido, but let me
ask them to you to make sure we cover them. Because one of them was, there's been a lot of
talk about bat shapes this season. Do you think that customized bat shapes for players is going
to be the future of offense? Have we touched on that at all? No, that's torpedo bats. Yeah,
a lot of people talking about torpedo bats. There's a lot of good research out there right now.
Vivian is one of the people out there who's spearheading a lot of this
torpedo bat physics research with Ellen Nathan and Tom Tango in the public space. I do recommend
perusing blue sky for some torpedo bat physics research. Okay, cool. Arsena has asked that
question about, have you seen the effect of torpedo bats in the data yet? Oh, I would say,
well, I'll answer it this way. Baseball is like over 150 years old. And every year there's always
some technological advancement in the equipment, whether it's the shoes or the gloves or the bat.
And so I think every year you could probably see the effects of some sort of equipment change. But
is the torpedo bat going to be as revolutionary as, I don't know, a wood bat versus an aluminum bat?
I'm unsure. I mean, a batter is swinging with so much force. I'm unsure how much a particular bat
is going to affect the application of force onto a ball. This is a finnick question.
It's above my pay grade. Yeah. But Ellen Nathan and Vivian, who are both in the public space doing
this kind of work, they have some pretty good thoughts. I think it's not necessarily about
how much harder you're going to be able to let the ball fly, but it's actually the amount of area
that your bat's going to be able to cover to produce those speeds. So we shouldn't think
about it as adding on as a multiplier effect. We should think about it as you get more coverage on
your bat and you could do it more consistently, probably. Okay, cool. All right. Well, I just
looked at the clock and we somehow have 10 minutes left. That's wild to me. This has gone by so
quickly. And I want to get in a question that is more on the advice side, like the career advice
side. And Emily asked a great question. I'm going to ask if she wants to unmute and ask her question
live because it's on the advice side. Hello. Sure. My son is currently interested in being a sports
data analyst when he grows up. So I know he's 13, so that may change. But do you have any advice
for someone looking to get started in the field? You know, how to get into sports analytics?
Yeah. I mean, the two easiest things, one, like, if they have an interest in
quantitative analysis of some sort, learning how to code sooner than later is always good.
If they're already dabbling in Excel or Google Sheets or whatever spreadsheet
service they use, that's a really good start. On my YouTube, there's a boot camp I put together.
When was it? Chat. Two years ago. Seven videos, completely free. It takes you from using Excel to
being able to manipulate stuff in Pandas. And there's free data, and there's an entire boot
camp homework section. And you can use the Discord to get homework help if you want.
But being able to at least do things quantitatively and get used to that,
whether it's like playing fantasy, like whether it's fantasy baseball, fantasy basketball,
fantasy football, trying to quantitatively approach playing something like that,
that's a pretty good space to get started. A lot of people end up doing that first.
And then I'd say the other side is like to just get in is the more you have a project in mind,
the more projects you can complete and put on, whether it's GitHub, being 13 with a GitHub is
kind of crazy to think about, but there's a lot of people with that now. But being able to put
projects out there and just say, like, I went from beginning to end with a project. And it was,
you know, how to evaluate whether, like when to draft a running back in fantasy football,
when to draft a quarterback in fantasy football, like some questions that might, you know,
have a lot of resources out there already, but coming up with your own answer and using your
own methods, that shows a lot of initiative for hiring managers, I would say. And that's not just
for sports, but that's, I think, for everything. Yeah, follow your curiosity. I would say, like,
pick a pick a thing that you're interested in and have a question about. And if he really
loves sports, like, go find the data, see if you can answer it, even if it's imperfectly.
There was a great question in the chat from Amiko to the chat, which is, is there a place to go
for sports data, whether it's baseball or others. So, I really encourage everybody to go pop some
things in the reply to Amiko's question for resources, because there are a lot of, like,
data packages in R and Python that contain a lot of, like, prepackaged data. So, you don't have to
go scrape it yourself. There are some APIs I know that exist. So, everybody help Amiko out. I would
love that. For R, baseball R is probably the best resource for, like, pitch-by-pitch, play-by-play
data. Shout out to Bill Petty, who helps maintain that. Great. Arsenis and Treven just added those.
So, thanks. Thanks, y'all. Treven, yeah, he's a chat regular. Welcome to chat regulars. I have
seen a few of them who are also, like, you know, people who have competed on some of your shows. So,
I love seeing that. I feel like they're celebrities that I'm getting to see in my chat. We have so
many more questions, and we only have, like, four minutes left. So, I would love to ask Joey to
unmute and ask his question. Joey, I gotta find you and unmute you here. Also, while you're looking
for that, you can always check my stream out, twitch.tv. But, yeah, go for it, Joey.
Cool. Hey, thanks, Nick. And this is, like, so cool. I really like your streams. I'm wondering
what methods or tools or cool math has been kind of invented or developed in sports analytics,
and then, like, exported to other domains. Like, this is a silly example, but I can see, like,
the kind of methods that model out, like, what's a really valuable player could be used in, like,
workforce analytics to say, like, you know, what's the marginal contribution of a team member to,
you get it. Are there examples like that? Oh, yeah. I think the easiest example from baseball
to other, this actually happened at KFC for me. There's this idea of park factors. So,
in baseball, to hit a home run, you gotta hit a ball really far over a wall. But that wall
isn't standardized. It's not like all walls are, like, 400 feet. So, some walls are, like,
as short as 320 feet, and some walls are as far as 421 feet. So, the idea of park factors really
makes team construction, like, what kind of hitters you want, what kind of pitchers you want,
pretty different from team to team based on the park they play in. So, if you think of, like,
the effect of the park, how hard you gotta hit a ball, how far you gotta hit a ball to get a home
run or to just get a hit, you can actually apply, like, the park factor value or at least the
methodology to all sorts of things, right? Like, at KFC, we did, I started doing not just, like,
park factor analysis, but really, like, zip code analysis. Like, are there certain zip codes that
have a predisposition to wings than other zip codes? And this actually ended up going as far
as to suggest we should actually reduce sales of wings from the majority of the United States,
except for KFCs that are within a certain radius of SEC schools in the South,
because that's really, like, where the profitable margins are for selling wings.
And so, if you apply this, like, idea of, like, what you need to do to hit a home run, what you
need to do to sell wings to make them profitable, you could actually apply that to a lot of things.
I actually ended up doing that with bull riding, too. So, when you have all this data on not just
the riders, but also the bulls, you could actually put together, like, do certain bulls add
to certain riders' scores? And so, there are certain bulls that actually, if you ride them,
your score does improve by a certain margin. And for other bulls, they would, like, you know,
decrease your score. And talking to certain cowboys, they would say, like, that's completely
true, because some bulls look like they're hard to ride, but they're easier to ride,
and that gives you a higher score. Whereas some bulls are just very difficult to ride,
and they do it in kind of an ugly way, and that actually, like, decreases your score.
So, it's pretty interesting when it comes to, like, applying something, like, from baseball to
another field. I always think I'm taking so much stuff from other fields and applying it to
baseball. But I think park practice is probably one of those things that I've seen in a lot of
places that they might not call it park factors or environment factors, but I see it as park
factors. I'm like, oh, that's park factors.
Amazing. Joey, this is a fantastic question. Thank you so much for asking it. And thank you so much
for the millions of questions that we could not even get to. We got so many. So, Nick, I am going
to make sure that you get all of those questions, and hopefully you have access to the Slido and you
can see them. And I will also say I put a word cloud in the Slido, because data science is not
one thing. Data analytics is not one thing. The word cloud is, like, describe your work in three
words or less. No cheating. So, everybody should be able to see the results of that word cloud
after you do it. I think that's a great way to kind of wrap this up. We have one minute left,
so I will tell everybody, don't forget that you can save the chat. Go up to the top right,
click the little three dots and save chat if you don't want to lose a lot of the resources
that you saw today. Thank you so much to Nick. And next week we have Trevor Fry,
lead data analyst at Pinterest. So, stick around for that next week. Nick, thanks so much for
joining us. This was so much fun. I could have done this for another hour. Everybody go hang
out with Nick in his stream. Thanks, Libby, and thanks everyone in the closet for letting me come
on and help host today. And yeah, for those who wanted to ask questions and couldn't get them
now, feel free to join us. We start the stream usually 8 p.m. Eastern, so if you're available
then and you want to ask questions, join us in chat and I could always get your answers over
there. Yes, and if you want to participate in something that's a live game show like VizBuzz,
get a hold of Nick or me and maybe we can help you do that, all right? Thank you so much,
everybody. I'm gonna hang out for another second so everybody can grab the resources that they
want to grab, but goodbye. Feel free to drop off. I will see you next week. Thanks for hanging out
with me on my birthday week. Tomorrow's my birthday. Happy birthday, Libby. Thank you. Bye, everybody.